For example, a normalization Protocol may involve a ‘ robust multiarray average normalization ’ Action that uses Bioconductor ‘ affy ’ Software  with certain Para- meterValues . Data types Description , BibliographicReferences , DatabaseEntry , URI , and FileAttachment enable researchers to freely add additional annotations to certain data types - DimensionElement , Investigation , Protocol , ProtocolApplication , and Data . For example, researchers can annotate a Gene with one or more DatabaseEntries , referring to unique database accession numbers for automated data integration. A unique feature of XGAP is the uniform treatment of the various trait and subject annotations. The drawback of allowing users to freely add additional annotations such as described above is that users and tools using metabolite and gene traits, for example, would have to inspect each Trait instance to see whether it is actually a metabolite or gene, and how it is annotated. That is why we instead use the object-oriented method of ‘ inheritance ’ to explicitly add essential properties to Trait and Subject variants to make sure that they are described in a uniform way. For example, Metabolite extends Trait , which explicitly adds properties ID, Name and Type  to metabolite specific properties Mass, Formula and Structure. See Jones et al. for the complete FuGE specifi- cations and Jones and Paton  for a discussion on the benefits and drawbacks of alternative mechanisms for supporting extension in object models. Table 4 illustrates the usage of these annotation data types. Another feature of XGAP is the uniform treatment of all data on these subjects and traits. To understand basic data in XGAP, newcomers just have to learn that all data are stored as Data matrices with each DataElement describing an observation on Subjects and/or Traits . Unlike the proven matrix structures used in MAGE-TAB , in XGAP these data can be on any Trait and/or Subject combination, that is, we did not create many variants of DataElement to accommodate each combination of Trait and Subject such as MAGE-TAB ’ s ExpressionDataElement , MassSpecDataElement , eQtlMappingDataElement , and so on. Instead, we store all these data using the generic type DataElement and limit extension to Trait and Subject only. This avoids the  explo- sion of DataElement extensions so researchers can provide basic data as common data matrices  and can still add particular annotations flexibly to the matrix row and columns to allow for  biotechnologies as demonstrated in the various Trait extensions in Figure 1. Keeping this simple and uniform data structure greatly enhances data and software usability and hence productivity, in line with the findings by Brazma et al.  and Rayner et al. that the simple tabular structures underlying biological data should be exploited instead of making it overly complicated. After structural homogenization, such as provided by FuGE and XGAP, semantic queries are the remaining major barrier for integration of experimental metadata. This requires ontologies that describe the properties of the materials and also descriptions of experimental pro- cesses, data and instruments. The former are provided by species-specific ontologies that are available from various sources. The Ontology for BioMedical investigation  may provide a solution for the experimental descriptors and is being used in this context by, for example, the Immune Epitope Database . To enable researchers to use these well understood descriptors, XGAP inherits from FuGE the mechanism of ‘ annotations ’ , a special field to link any data object to one or more ontology terms. For example, researchers can annotate a Gene with one or more OntologyTerms if required, referring to standard ontology terms from OBO  or ontology terms defined locally. To enable data exchange using the XGAP model, we produced a simple text-file format  based on the experience that for data formats to be used, data files should be easily created using simple Excel and text editor tools and closely resemble existing practices. This format is automatically derived from the model by requiring that all annotations on Investigations , Protocols , Traits , Subjects , and extensions thereof, are described as delimited text files with columns matching the properties described in the object model and each row describing one data instance. Optionally, sets of DataElements can also be formatted as separate text matrices with row and column names matching these in the Trait and Subject annotation files, and with each matrix value matching one DataElement . The dimensions of each data matrix are then listed by a row in the annotations on Data . Figure 2 shows one investigation in the XGAP tabular data format with one delimited text file per data type that is, there are files named ‘ probe.txt ’ and ‘ individual. txt ’ , with each row describing a microarray probe or individual, respectively - and one text matrix file per set of DataElements - that is, there are files named ‘ data/ expressions.txt ’ and ‘ data/genotypes.txt ’ . The properties of each data matrix is then described in ‘ data.txt ’ ; that is, for the ‘ data/expressions.txt ’ there is a row in ‘ data. txt ’ that says that its columns refer to ‘ individual.txt ’ , that its rows refer to ‘ probe.txt ’ and that its values are ‘ decimal ’ . Raw data sets and data sets in other formats can be retained in a directory labeled ‘ original ’ . After proving its value in several proprietary projects, a growing array of public data sets are now available at  demonstrating the use of XGAP-TAB . A pilot software infrastructure is available at  to help genotype-to-phenotype researchers to adopt XGAP as a backbone for their data and tool integration. We chose to use the MOLGENIS toolkit  to auto-generate from the XGAP model: 1, an SQL  file with all necessary statements for setting up your own, customized variant of the XGAP database; 2, application programming interfaces  in R, Java and Web Services that allow bioinformaticians to plug-in their R processing scripts, Taverna workflows  and other tools; 3, a bespoke web-based graphical user interface  by which researchers can submit and retrieve data and run plugged-in tools; and 4, import/export wizards to  load and validate data sets exchanged in XGAP-TAB format. The auto-generation process can be repeated to quickly customize XGAP from an extended model, for example, to accommodate a particular new type of measurement technology or experimental design. Figure 3 shows the GUI to upload, manage, find and download genotype and phenotype data to the database. The GUI is generated with a uniform ‘ look-and-feel ’ , thereby lowering the barrier for novice users. Investigations can be described with all subjects, traits, data and protocol applications involved. Data can be entered using either the edit boxes or using menu-option ‘ file|upload ’ . This option enables upload of whole lists of traits and subjects from a simple tab-delimited format , which can easily be produced with Excel or R; MOLGENIS automatically generates online documentation describing the expected format. Subsequently, the protocol applications involved can be added with the resulting raw data  and processed data . The software behind the GUI checks the relationships between subjects, traits, and data elements so no ‘ orphaned ’ data are loaded into the database - for example, genetic fingerprint data cannot be added before all information is uploaded on the markers and subjects involved. Standard paths through the data upload process are employed to ensure that only complete and valid data are uploaded and to provide a consistent user experience. Biologists can use the graphical user interface to navi- gate and retrieve available data for analysis. They can use the advanced search options  to find certain traits, subjects, or data. Using menu option ‘ file|down- load ’ they can download visible/selected  data as tab-delimited files to analyze them in third party software. Bioinformaticians can ‘ plug-in ’ a custom-built screen  that allows processing of selected data inside the GUI, for example, visua- lizing a correlation matrix as a graph  without the additional steps of downloading data and uploading it into another tool. Biologists can create link-outs to related information, for example, to probes in GeneNet- work.org . Table 5 summarizes use cases of the graphical user interface. De facto standard analysis tools are emerging, for example, tools for transcript data  or metabolite abundance data  to mention just a few. These tools are typically implemented using the open source software for statistical analysis and graphics named R . Bioinformaticians can connect their particular R or Java programs to the XGAP database using an API with similar functionality to the GUI, that is, using simple commands like ‘ find ’ , ‘ add ’ and ‘ update ’ . Scripts in other programming languages and workflow tools like Taverna  can use.